again welcome back to our our study of Proverbs and we are in Proverbs chapter 7 and we're going to look today at verses 19 and 20 so let's read them Proverbs chapter 7 let me find it here in my Bible 19 and 20 let me give you a little bit of introduction so this
this woman who we are saying represents the way the world would treat us.
She's been wandering around in the streets and she has been looking for a young man to tempt and deceive and to lead him into sin.
Now, we're going to look in verse 19 and 20, one of her arguments that she's going to use in order to try to get him to sin.
So she says in verse 19,
For my husband is not at home.
He is gone on a long journey.
He has taken a bag of money with him.
At the full moon, he will come home.
All right, let's go to the Lord in prayer.
Father, I come before you and I pray for every person, parents and children that may be watching this
this segment.
Father, we are so small and our words have no power, but your word and your spirit, Lord, can do all things.
I pray that you would use this, this teaching, this time of sharing that all would see that you are the God who sees
And that can be both good news and bad news.
For the faithful believer, Lord, in time of trouble, it is good news to know that you are the God who sees.
But for the wayward one, the one who's rebellious, who thinks that they sin and get away with it, that they're hidden.
Lord, this is not just bad news.
It's it's terrifying news.
And I pray that you would make that a reality in the lives of, in my life, but also in the lives, Lord, of those who listen in Jesus' name, amen.
So this lady is trying to draw this, she's a married woman, she's trying to draw this young man to her house, and she's trying to convince him to enter into sin,
And one of the things that she tells him is that, hey, my husband's gone.
We're not going to get caught.
And that's one of the things that the world and the devil will constantly set before the believer.
Hey, you can do this and no one will see it.
Now, here's what you need to understand.
It is very possible that no human being
We'll see you do that.
It is possible, not likely, but it is possible that you will get away with whatever, whatever sin you're committing.
That is possible with regard to men, but it is highly unlikely.
And then something else you need to understand.
Every time you go back and commit that sin, the chances are increasing exponentially that you will get caught
by men sooner or later.
You know, detective work and forensic work, it has so advanced that sometimes I'll watch these programs or read a book where they catch criminals in the most extraordinary way.
I mean, finding just a piece of grass on the front of a car that is found in the same place where
a murder or a crime occurred.
It's unbelievable what men can do, what investigators can do to track and find a criminal.
And it's even going to become more and more difficult as they start to develop and use AI for better, for worse, at the same time it is going to increase the potential of discovering who is committing crimes.
Now, here's what I want you to see.
It's almost impossible if you continue and sin that you will not get caught by men.
But it is impossible to think that you can avoid God, that you can do something, that you can commit a sin that God will not see.
So I want you to look at a few things here.
I want us to look at just in the book of Proverbs, in the book of Ecclesiastes, in Proverbs 5, 21, it said, for the ways of a man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he watches all his paths.
It says the ways of a man.
It's implural here, indicating every way.
That's not just every deed, not just every word,
but even every thought of a man is not sometimes before the Lord, but it is constantly before the Lord.
It's not that the Lord looks over here, and while he's looking over here, he doesn't see you over there.
The Lord is everywhere in all his fullness, and he knows everything that is going on, and he knows it immediately, perfectly,
without the need of investigation.
He simply knows it.
And it says, he watches over all our paths.
There's no place that we can go.
I remember hearing a story where a young man, he was kind of reverse the roles, a young man was trying to get a young girl to do things with him that were sinful.
And she said, okay, I'll do it.
If you can take me somewhere where no one can see us.
And he took her to various places and she kept saying, no, we can be found out here.
We can be found out here.
We can be seen here.
And in the end, he said, how could anybody see us in all these places?
And she said, God can see us in all these places.
And that's true.
Now, I want you to think about this.
We talk about the omniscience of God.
the all knowledge of God.
So we're not just saying that he looks and he can figure it out over a period of time or he can put several things together and eventually he's going to figure out what's going on.
Remember the language I used?
He knows everything perfectly.
He knows everything immediately.
There's no delay.
He knows everything
without the need for an investigation, without the need for making a calculation.
I had a friend in college and he was so smart.
And you could just throw these incredible formulas at him, mathematical problems at him, and just it seemed like he would answer 10 times faster than everyone else in the classroom.
I'm back there trying to figure it out in my head and he's just boom.
every time, boom, boom.
He was fast, but he had to calculate, he had to think, he had to take putting one number to another number to another number.
God isn't like that.
He knows everything exhaustively.
That means there's nothing outside of his knowledge.
He knows it immediately.
And without calculation, without investigation, he doesn't send an angel from his throne.
and say, go figure this out for me or go find that kind of news.
He knows it all.
You say, how can that be?
Well, what you have to realize is God is not like us.
We are physical.
We are matter.
We are flesh.
God is spirit.
So functions in a completely different realm.
That's why I'm always telling young people, you know, don't say keep God number one because you're assuming
that God is on a list with the rest of us and he's like us just bigger and better.
That's not true.
What you have to understand is God is not on a list.
He's in a category all to himself and everyone else is in another category.
Now you can put everyone else on a list, but you can't put God on that list because he's in a completely different box.
Okay.
Now,
Proverbs 15-3.
It says, the eyes of the Lord are in every place.
Now think about that.
Every place.
Not just in an open field, but in the deepest, deepest recess or cave that exists on the planet.
He's at the surface of the ocean.
He is at the very bottom of the ocean.
He knows the farthest star, his eyes are on the farthest star.
His eyes are on everything at one time.
Do you see that?
The eyes of the Lord are in every place.
Now listen to this, watching the evil and the good.
And so what do we have here?
We have bad news, don't wait.
And we have good news that if you're doing good,
If you're being faithful, even though no one else is seeing you, no one else is watching you, you know that he is.
But also, if you're doing evil, if you're getting away with crime after crime after crime and no one sees you and no one ever catches you, he sees you and he will catch you.
You know, I was preaching in a prison several months ago,
And I kept hearing this complaint from the prisoners that they were in prison because they were, they admitted, they committed crimes, but that they were in prison because, well, they were poor.
They had no power and they couldn't defend themselves.
Then they would say, but there are wealthy, wealthy, powerful, powerful men, businessmen, politicians,
that commit crimes that are even worse than the crimes they committed, that the prisoners committed, and yet they never go to prison.
You know what I told them?
I said, the fact that you're in prison is a gift from God.
He is stopping you now in your crimes, showing you you're wrong.
He's catching you, allowing you to be caught and giving you an opportunity to see your sin, repent and be saved.
With those other men,
He's allowing them to get away with it and get away with it and get away with it.
That's not so much mercy.
That's judgment.
Because when they die, then there's no hope of redemption.
So when you see people and you're going to, when you get older, young people, you're going to see rich and powerful people who get away with everything and they laugh about it.
They'll condemn others who commit lesser crimes, but they themselves will get away with it until they die.
Then they will stand before God.
Another thing I want to point out to you because, you know, your kids and I need to take every opportunity to apply what we're learning.
It is a grace from God when your parents catch you doing something wrong.
When your parents find out that you did something, you told a lie, you were mean to your sister, whatever, that is a grace.
And if that your parents respond properly, they will rebuke you.
They will correct you.
They will even discipline you.
And even though that discipline may hurt, it is a grace.
God is exposing your sin so that you don't just keep going on and on and on and getting worse and worse and worse.
Now,
Let's look at one last verse here, Ecclesiastes 12, 14, for God will bring every act to judgment, everything which is hidden, whether it is good or evil.
Again, I've got good news.
God sees every faithful act.
I've got bad news.
God sees every faithless act.
And not only
As it says in the other text, not only does he see it, but it says God will bring it to judgment.
There is coming a day when both you and I will stand before God.
Now, if he judges us for every sin, every crime that we have ever committed,
there is absolutely no hope.
The only hope we have is trusting in Christ, because when he was on the cross, all our crimes, everything that we did, both in public and in secret, that was sin, it was placed on him.
And he suffered and paid the price for it.
And if we trust in Christ now, then when we stand before him in judgment,
We will be justified.
We will be declared right before God.
We will be invited into the fullness of His kingdom.
You know, it's very interesting in the book of Revelation when it talks about the great white throne judgment.
It talks about the books being opened.
Notice it doesn't say book.
There's a book of life and then there's books of all our deeds.
The idea that's being presented there is God knows
every one of your thoughts, every one of your deeds, he knows you better than you know yourself, and he doesn't forget anything that you do or I do.
And if we're judged by those books without Christ, there is no hope.
Now, before we go, I want to say one other thing.
How can I say this?
You know Jesus, especially in the Book of Matthew and the Sermon on the Mount, he warns about doing our righteousness before men to be seen by them.
It seems like today, you know with all these, what do you call them, selfies, that no one can experience or do anything
and feel complete about it unless they take a picture of themselves or they film themselves doing something and then post it for everyone to see.
It's amazing.
It's like you have an experience, you're out hiking in a beautiful place and there's a beautiful sunset and, but you're not happy unless you get a picture of it and you can post it for everyone to see.
I've seen, you know, preachers who will go out, you know, and they preach in the streets, but they, they film themselves.
And then feel like they've got to, it's no good unless they present it all before the public to see.
Let me share with you one thing.
It's a truth that has meant the world to me.
And it's simply this, God is the God who sees.
I don't have to be seen by the public because God sees me.
You don't have to be seen.
You don't have to be rewarded.
by the public.
You don't have to be applauded by the public.
You don't have to do things in the side of men for some sort of recognition because God is watching you always.
He is the God who sees.
When you come to understand that, then you start realizing something.
Actually, if you're going to seek to do something, don't seek to do it publicly.
Seek to do its
privately hidden so that only God sees what you're doing.
It's amazing.
The young person, listen to me, you're going to go through times when no one understands you, when no one understands how much you're suffering, how much you're hurting, when no one's going to understand the unfulfilled desires and everything that you have.
Isn't it a comfort to know that God sees
And he knows and he understands completely and that you don't have to be famous.
You don't have to do your works before men and be recognized because God is watching.
And if you do the good, his will, you will be rewarded in heaven.
Let me give you a philosophical question and we'll end with that.
Why would God plant?
the most beautiful flower he's ever created in a forest so deep that no man, no angel will ever walk through it.
How is God glorified by a flower that's so hidden?
He's glorified by that flower because he sees it every day and delights in it.
One of the things that I tell, especially preachers, is this, that their life should be like the tip of an iceberg.
And what do I mean?
When you see a tip of an iceberg coming out of the water, you do know right that that's the smallest part of the iceberg.
That's just the part that's exposed.
And underneath it is huge.
That's the way our lives ought to be.
that our public life is only this small part of who we are.
The big part of us is our private life, our personal relationship with Christ through the Word of God, through prayer, and through walking with Him in obedience when no one else is looking.
Okay?
Yeah.
will be hidden and will be looking to him knowing that he's always looking back.
All right.
So if you clean your room and mom and dad don't notice it.
Don't worry.
God does.
Let's pray.
Father, thank you for your word.
And I pray that you would use it.
Oh dear God, use your word.
Use the wisdom of Scripture in the life of the young boys and girls, teenagers, parents that may listen to these little simple devotions.
Use your word word in their life.